  Welcome to 'udd', a computer fantasy role playing game.  You will find that
this is somewhat more than just a clever computer game, that the characters
you create may contain a tiny bit of yourself, and that the urge to return and
explore just one more level down, if not carefully controlled, can begin to
take precedence over work, family, eating, sleeping...

  If you still wish to go on, I will help you create a character who will bear
your weapons and armor and accompany you into a labyrinthine dungeon filled
with fearsome monsters, fabulous treasure and frightful perils.

  If you are patient and skillfull, your character will live to grow in power
and wealth, and will be able to explore deeper and deeper into uncharted
regions from which few return.  But be warned!  If you are too bold or too
greedy, you won't survive long.

  As long as it remains alive, your character will remain in the character
file, waiting for you to return and bring it to life.

    Characters have these attributes:

        Type                    Strength
        Level                   Intelligence
        Experience              Wisdom
        Gold                    Constitution
        Hit points              Dexterity
        Spells                  Charisma
        Dungeon                 Magic possessions

  Most of these attributes are displayed during your expedition.  It is often
quite important to watch them, as you will see.

TYPE

There are three character types:  fighter, magician, and cleric.  Each has
some advantages and disadvantages.  Fighters are much better in combat and
harder to kill, but magicians and clerics can cast spells.

LEVEL

Level is a general indicator of your character's overall power.  It is
determined by experience and determines hit points and spells.  There is
essentially no limit to the level a character can attain.

EXPERIENCE

Experience is gained by killing monsters (immediate) and gathering treasure
(cumulative).  In order to advance a level, you must double your experience.
This total is updated continually during your expedition, therefore you may
advance a level at any time.

GOLD

Each treasure you find is worth some amount of gold.  A temporary running
total is kept during your expedition and added to your permanent total when
you leave the  dungeon.  A portion of your temporary total also is added to
your experience.  Your permanent gold total is used to buy weapons,
transportation between dungeons, etc.

HIT POINTS

Hit points represent the number of wounds you can absorb in combat.  Each time
you advance a level, they increase.  You should watch this number very
carefully in combat as you don't want to let it fall within range of a fatal
blow.  If you are lucky enough to find a magic ring, it will recover some lost
hit points for you each time you move.

SPELLS

Four levels of six spells each are available to magicians and clerics.  Also,
fighters can find magic wands which can give the finder the ability to cast
spells.  Spells can be cast at any time.  Each time your character gains a
level you will be granted more and higher level spells.

DUNGEON

There are two dungeons supplied with UDD:  Crestwood and Squire's Hole.

STRENGTH

Strength is of great importance to fighters as it partially determines how
well they can fight.  Magicians and clerics, however, do tend to run out of
spells every now and then...

INTELLIGENCE

Intelligence is critical for magicians.  It determines the power of spells.

WISDOM

Wisdom means to clerics what intelligence does to magicians.

CONSTITUTION

Of all the initial attributes, constitution is the most important to all as it
determines hit points.

DEXTERITY

Dexterity is also very important as it determines the probability of blows
landing, spells working, and the ability to avoid falling in pits, etc.

CHARISMA

Charisma controls the ability to cast some spells.

MAGIC POSSESSIONS

Previous adventurers who were not fortunate enough to return alive have left
all sorts of valuable possessions in the dungeon.  You may find weapons,
armor, shields or even elven boots and cloaks.  All of these things will help
you but none so much as a magic ring of regeneration, which recovers some lost
hit points each time you move, allowing you to wander far from the safety of
the entrance.


  When you enter the dungeon for the first time, stay near the entrance and by
no means, fight dragons or anything else higher than level 1.  If you lose
more than a couple of hit points, evade if you can and run!  If you reach the
door, your hit points and spells will be returned.

  I can't tell you too much more about what you will find in those dark and
slimy passages.  I am not stupid, er, brave enough go inside myself, but of
those who have ventured within and returned alive, some have muttered of being
suddenly transported to another room nearby, or of finding magnificent thrones
with magic runes, and colored fountains which may grant great favor or great
harm.

  Many creatures have inhabited these caverns since their creation, somewhere
in the mists of time, and most of them were quite evil or disgusting.  One old
story tells of an order of demented monks who built altars which still exist,
although partly in this world and partly in theirs.  Another tells of dwarves
who made secret doors which may be seen only if you happen to stand in the
right spot.

  But the legend that holds the most interest for fools, I mean adventurers
such as yourself is that of the orb, an enormous eye-shaped gem which, if
gazed into, grants its finder immortality.  They say it was created and hidden
by a mad wizard long, long ago and still waits deep in the musty tunnels and
dank caverns, guarded by enormous dragons and, er, well, never mind.

  The last and best advice I can give you is to use the keypad with one hand
and map your route with the other.  Some have found a pad of graph paper
useful.  If you don't make a map, you will surely become lost and die.  I have
warned uncounted novice adventurers in the past, most rooms and passages look
the same in the dark.  But they never listen ...

  If you need help during your expedition, type 'H'.

When you get the "->" prompt the following keys are meaningful:


        W=North                                 8=North
A=West  S=Stay  D=East                 4=West   5=Stay   6=East
        X=South                                 2=South


Other keys:
    H     Help (type this list)
    C     Cast spell
    R     Drop the ORB if you've got it
    <CR>  List stats and equipment
    <LF>  List experience, gold, hits, and spells
    <ESC> Replot your position
    K     Fall on your sword
    Q     Temporarily quit expedition
          (it will be restarted where you left)
    U     Utter a prayer for escape to the Nameless God


                                    ***


SPELLS AND MAGIC

  There are two classes of spells: Those that last for a while, and those that
don't.  In each of these classes are two further distinctions: Spells that are
meant for use in combat, and those that aren't.

  Combat spells are flagged with a '*'.  These may or may not work, depending
on the relative levels of the spell caster and his target.  If the opponent is
a great deal more powerful than the Magic-User or Cleric, it is very highly
resistant to the latter's magicking.  The formula for spell efficacy varies
from spell to spell, and contains a random factor.

  Some spells become more effective as the Magic-User or Cleric increases in
power.  Spells such as Lightning Bolt use the caster's level as a base number
of points delivered, and then add on a random factor.  If this is the case,
the spell description mentions the exact formula.

  Each spell is described briefly, and is labeled 'Combat,' if applicable.  In
addition, each is labeled either 'Immediate' or 'Duration.' The former do
whatever it is that they do RIGHT NOW, while the latter's effects take a
little while to disperse.


                        Magic-User Spells:

                Level 1                         Level 2
                -------                         -------
            1*  Magic Missile               1*  Phantasmal Forces
            2*  Charm Monster               2*  Web
            3   Shield                      3*  Lightning Bolt
            4*  Sleep                       4   Strength
            5   Protection from Evil        5   Levitate
            6   Light                       6   Invisibility

                Level 3                         Level 4
                -------                         -------
            1*  Fireball                    1   Teleport
            2*  Confusion                   2*  Power Word KILL
            3   Pass Wall                   3*  Prismatic Wall
            4*  Hold Monster                4   Time Stop
            5   Fear                        5*  Pillar of Fire
            6   Continual Light             6*  Summon Demon

* - Combat Spells


                        First Level Spells:

*Magic Missile:         Fires a magical dart from the caster's finger.  This
        (Immediate)     does not miss, and does 1-6 points of damage.

*Charm Monster:         Basically, this hypnotizes the caster's opponent,
        (Immediate)     which therefore neither attacks nor dodges.  This
                        spell is easily broken, however.

Shield:                 Creates an invisible wall around the caster, causing
        (Duration)      any monster attacking to do so at a disadvantage.

*Sleep:                 Puts the caster's opponent into a deep sleep.  While
        (Immediate)     sleeping, it neither attacks nor dodges (obviously).

Protection from Evil:   Causes the caster's opponent to attack at a
        (Duration)      disadvantage.

Light:                  Creates a point-source light, equivalent to one torch,
        (Duration)      over the caster's head.  Effects are cumulative.


                        Second Level Spells:

*Phantasmal Force:      Causes the caster's opponent to believe it is
        (Immediate)     confronting a creature much mightier than itself.  This
                        often causes flight.

*Web:                   Entangles the caster's opponent in a magical net,
        (Immediate)     making it helpless to attack or defend itself.

*Lightning Bolt:        Delivers (level) + 2-16 points of electrical damage to
        (Immediate)     the caster's opponent.

Strength:               Temporarily augments the caster's Strength attribute,
        (Duration)      improving his/her combat skill commensurately.

Levitate:               Causes the caster to float off the floor, making
        (Duration)      him/her harder to hit.

Invisibility:           Strangely enough, causes the caster to fade from sight.
        (Duration)      This puts monsters at a decided disadvantage.


                        Third Level Spells:

*Fireball:              Causes a fiery explosion in the vicinity of the
        (Immediate)     caster's opponent.  Does (level) + 4-24 points of fire
                        damage.

*Confusion:             Causes the caster's opponent to lose clarity of mind,
        (Immediate)     with attendant co-ordination.  It cannot attack.  Spell
                        lasts for (level) + 1-6 rounds.

Pass Wall:              Shifts the molecular structure of the desired wall such
        (Immediate)     that it becomes as air, allowing passage through it.

*Hold Monster:          Mesmerises the caster's opponent so that it cannot
        (Immediate)     attack or dodge.

Fear:                   Causes the caster's opponent to become fearful of
        (Duration)      him/her, and attack at a disadvantage.

Continual Light:        Same as a Light spell, save that this is twice as
        (Duration)      bright and lasts for the duration of the adventure.


                        Fourth Level Spells:

Teleport:               Transports, instantly, the caster from where he is to
        (Immediate)     somewhere else.  The caster has no control of the
                        destination.

*Power Word KILL:       Your basic Death Spell.  Causes the caster's opponent to
        (Immediate)     drop dead on the spot.

*Prismatic Wall:        Encases the caster in a multicoloured sphere of
        (Immediate)     protection, possibly destroying any attacking monster.

Time Stop:              Freezes Time in the caster's vicinity, while permitting
        (Duration)      him/her to move freely.  Monsters cannot fight back.

*Pillar of Fire:        Causes the caster's target to be immolated in a pillar
        (Immediate)     of flames.

*Summon Demon:          Calls one of Hell's denizens to the caster's aid.  The
        (Immediate)     demon will attempt to drag the caster's antagonist back
                        to Hell with it.


                                    ***


                            Clerical Spells:

                Level 1                         Level 2
                -------                         -------
        1   Protection from Evil            1   Detect Traps
        2   Light                           2   Silence
        3   Cure Light Wounds               3   Pray
        4*  Turn Undead                     4*  Hold Monster

                Level 3                         Level 4
                -------                         -------
        1   Cure Serious Wounds             1*  Holy Word
        2*  Dispell Undead                  2*  Finger of Death
        3   Continual (Bright) Light        3*  Blade Barrier
        4*  Plague                          4   Raise Dead

* - Combat Spells


                        First Level Spells:

Protection from Evil:   Causes monsters to be at a disadvantage on attacks.
        (Duration)

Light:                  Creates a point-source of light, equivalent to one
        (Duration)      torch, to appear over the caster's head.  Multiple
                        applications of this spell increase visibility.


Cure Light Wounds:      Heals 2-7 points of damage incurred by the caster.
        (Immediate)

*Turn Undead:           Causes undead creatures to run away in sheer terror.
        (Immediate)


                        Second Level Spells:

Detect Traps:           Increases, for the duration of the spell, the caster's
        (Duration)      ability to find traps in loot, such as an exploding
                        Chest.


Silence:                Puts attacking monsters at a disadvantage, and lowers
        (Duration)      the probability of encountering Wandering Monsters.


Prayer:                 Gives the caster an advantage when attacking; i.e.,
        (Duration)      makes it easier for him/her to hit his/her opponent.


*Hold Monster:          Causes the caster's opponent to be HELD (temporarily
        (Immediate)     placed in stasis).  A HELD monster cannot fight back,
                        noro can it dodge.


                        Third Level Spells:

Cure Serious Wounds:    Heals 4-14 points of damage to the caster.
        (Immediate)

*Dispell Undead:        Causes undead creatures to be utterly annihilated.
        (Immediate)

Continual Light:        Causes a bright point-source of light to appear above
        (Duration)      the caster's head.  This light will remain for the
                        duration of the adventure.  See also LIGHT (1st Level).

*Plague:                Causes the caster's opponent to contract a combination
        (Immediate)     of several deadly diseases, which will kill it in one
                        round.  CAUTION: THE CASTER MAY CONTRACT THE PLAGUE AS
                        WELL!!!


                        Fourth Level Spells:

*Holy Word:             Banishes the caster's opponent to eternal damnation.
        (Immediate)

*Finger of Death:       Imbues the caster's finger (which is immediately
        (Immediate)     applied to the opponent) with such unspeakable
                        God-granted power that living things cannot contain
                        it.  Therefore, they die instantly.

*Blade Barrier:         Causes a circular wall of flashing, moving swords to
        (Immediate)     appear around the caster.  This wall increases in
                        diameter with great rapidity, catching and destroying
                        any attacking monster.

Raise Dead:             Attempts to bring the caster back from the dead.
        (Immediate)


                                    ***


MONSTERS

  The dungeons below have been inhabited by many creatures since the time of
creation.  They are mean and vicious and deranged beyond all imagination.  If
you insist upon entering, the following pages will give you some information
about the foes you may encounter.


SKELETON

  Re-animated bones of the dead that mindlessly obey their evil masters.  They
are unaffected by SLEEP or CHARM spells.


ZOMBIE

  Human corpses given new "life" by sinister magic.  They are unaffected by
SLEEP or CHARM spells.


GHOUL

  Ghouls are "undead", once human creatures which feed on human and other
corpses.  They are uneffected by either SLEEP or CHARM spells.  The magic
circle of protection from evil keeps these monsters completely at bay.


WRAITH

  Incorporeal, weightless apparitions born of evil and darkness.  They are
unaffected by SLEEP or CHARM spells.


SPECTRE

  Akin to a Wraith, but more powerful.  They are unaffected by SLEEP or CHARM
spells.


VAMPIRE

  The vampire is the most dreaded of the undead.  Their great strength is
derived from the blood of their victims.  SLEEP and CHARM spells have no
affect on them.


KOBOLD

  A dog-faced, two-legged creature approximately three feet tall.  They are
reasonably well armed, but never-the-less, are not too difficult to kill.


GNOLL

  An evil, hyena-headed, carnivorous humanoid, over 7 feet tall, with dirty
yellow or reddish-brown fur.


GOBLIN

  A short (four foot tall) creature with large forearms and hands.  Their
average intelligence and lack of special attacks or defenses makes them only
slightly more resistant a foe than the Kobold.


ORC

  This boar-faced, upright creature is fierce.  They are of average size
(about six feet tall) but with long upper limbs.  They live for about forty
years.


DWARF

  The dwarf is a human looking creature.  Although only 4 or so feet tall,
they weigh no less than 150 pounds due to their stocky build.  They live 350
years on the average.


HARPIE

  Harpies have the bodies of vutures but the upper torsos and heads of women.
The touch or sound of a harpie is extremely difficult to resist.  They are of
average size.


FIGHTER

  An intrepid warrior that revels in the thrill of danger, with skills that
are honed to deadly perfection.


BUGBEAR

  The bugbear is approximately seven feet tall and is armed with an assorted
collection of mismatched weapons and armor.  They are dangerous foes however,
because of their clumsy manner disguises their lightning quickness.


DOPPLEGANGER

  These two-legged creatures have the ability to take on whatever shape they
choose.  In combat they typically will assume the appearance of their
opponent.  They are subject to neither SLEEP nor CHARM spells.


MINOTAUR

  Minotaurs are large creatures having the head of a steer.  They are cunning
and have excellent senses.


OGRE

  Ogres are over nine feet tall with low intelligence.  Their great strength
makes them an able opponent.


GIANT

  The giant is a very large human-like creature of slow gait and questionable
intelligence.  Its great size and strength and its single-mindedness make it a
very dangerous creature in combat.


BALROG

  The balrog is a reptilian humanoid of exteremely large size.  They are
fierce in combat and are difficult to kill.


DRAGON

  The dragon is a winged snake-like creature of gigantic size.  Its scales
offer protection to all but magic weapons, and it is not often attacked by
anything in its right senses.
